‎The Scripture text is Matthew 10:16.
‎We invite you to open to Matthew chapter 10.
‎We’ll take a look at our text in the context.
‎Now, if you notice, in the first few verses,
‎the 12 apostles are listed.
‎But look at verse 5:
‎“These 12 Jesus sent out,
giving them these instructions.”
‎And the instructions, as you’ll see,
‎included that they
initially just go to the house of Israel.
‎If you look at verse 7, it says:
‎‘Preach the Kingdom of the heavens.’
‎Verse 8 says:
‎‘Cure people;
raise some dead ones; expel demons.’
‎And then if you look at verses 9 and 10,
‎it tells them how their ministry
is going to be financed
‎—primarily by contributions.
‎And then in verses 11-14,
he tells them about their territory.
‎He alludes to the door-to-door,
or house-to-house work,
‎how to follow up on interest,
‎and how to handle rejection.
‎But now we come to verse 16,
‎and it’s a continuation
of this meeting for service.
‎And now Jesus tells them something
‎that might be a little more intimidating
‎when they think about their upcoming role.
‎And so let’s read verse 16 in its entirety:
‎“Look! I am sending you out
as sheep among wolves;
‎“so prove yourselves cautious as serpents
‎and yet innocent as doves.”
‎So that was Jesus’ introduction
‎to the following circumstances.
‎Look at verse 17.
‎‘You’ll be handed over to courts and scourged’
‎and, verse 18,
“brought before governors and kings”
‎for being Christians.
‎Well, that was a lot for the apostles to absorb.
‎And we can just imagine them
looking at each other nervously,
‎maybe some anxiety playing on their faces.
‎His followers, though,
‎came to understand
what Jesus meant in verse 16.
‎He used four different animal types.
‎He said:
‎“I am sending you
out as sheep among wolves.”
‎Well, they would have immediately understood
that illustration.
‎That was used in the Hebrew Scriptures.
‎Psalm 100:3 says:
‎“We are his people
and the sheep of his pasture.”
‎They understood.
‎And they would have understood
the analogy of wolves;
‎they knew wolves
were vicious predators on sheep.
‎So they got the picture:
We’re not going to be well-received by all.
‎It was Jesus’ way
of warning them of potential trouble.
‎Well, what about this other analogy
of serpents and doves?
‎You know, being described as a snake
‎was not complimentary
back then, nor is it today.
‎So why did Jesus say that?
‎You know, probably the reason
why it’s not complimentary
‎is “the original serpent[’s]” reputation
‎when he wreaked havoc on the human race.
‎But our text says: ‘Be like serpents.’
‎In what way?
‎Remember, Genesis described the serpent
‎as ‘the most cautious
of all the animals Jehovah had made.’
‎That natural characteristic
‎is what Jesus
was highlighting for his followers.
‎They were to be cautious in the ministry,
‎particularly when facing opposition.
‎Well, are snakes really cautious?
‎You know, many of us
don’t even like to look at a snake,
‎let alone carefully study
its personality characteristics.
‎So I’m going to quote a British zoologist.
‎He said that even when attacking an enemy,
‎a serpent is cautious.
‎It tries to make sure that its strike
‎is going to be accurate and deadly.
‎And so the zoologist said that often they’ll make
‎several lunges toward the enemy,
‎and yet they fall short on purpose.
‎And sometimes when they make their lunge,
they don’t even open their mouth.
‎Why?
‎Because it’s just practicing.
‎It’s being cautious.
‎And the same zoologist said
that oftentimes, at this point,
‎you can see the snake
sometimes carefully uncoiling itself,
‎being ready for a hasty departure
‎if the enemy is too aggressive in return.
‎The snake is being cautious.
‎And remember, Jesus was involved
in the creation of the serpent,
‎so he would have well-known
this cautious nature.
‎And that’s what he said his followers
should try to include in their personality
‎—exercising caution—
‎particularly when facing wolflike opposition.
‎Well, how did Jesus
balance that characteristic
‎by including the dove in the illustration?
‎Well, if we were all “serpent” and no “dove,”
‎then much of the warmth
‎of sharing the good news would be lost,
‎so Jesus included the dove.
‎And what’s the natural characteristic of the dove?
‎Well, a dove is so soft
and gentle in appearance;
‎it has an appealing disposition.
‎In fact, the dove is so gentle and appealing
‎that it has actually earned the description
‎of being the sheep of the bird world.
‎So, what an appropriate way
‎for Jehovah to describe
this other aspect of his followers!
‎But what’s the downside
‎of being all lovey-dovey and no serpent?
‎Insight says:
“Doves are quite trusting of humans
‎and are rather easily entrapped
or snared with a net.”
‎So Jesus added this to the equation:
‎‘Be cautious as serpents.’
‎So in this way,
our gentle Christian personality
‎will not be taken advantage of.
‎We will not easily be trapped or ensnared.
‎We invite you to turn to Mark chapter 12.
‎Now, we know Jesus had dovelike qualities.
‎He was gentle; he was kind;
he was compassionate.
‎But was he ‘cautious as a serpent’?
‎Well, if you look in Mark chapter 12
at the last sentence in verse 14:
‎“Is it lawful to pay head tax to Caesar or not?”
‎Well, these proud Jewish religious Pharisees
‎were trying to trap Jesus
‎and get him to say something
against Roman nationalism.
‎Well, the direct answer to that question
‎from an “innocent dove” would be,
‎‘Yes, it’s proper to pay taxes to Rome.’
‎But that would have been a volatile response
‎as far as the Pharisees were concerned.
‎So notice how Jesus used caution
—‘cautious as a serpent.’
‎In verses 15 to 17, the Pharisees asked:
‎“‘Should we pay, or should we not pay?’
‎“Detecting their hypocrisy, he said to them:
‎“‘Why do you put me to the test?
‎“Bring me a denarius to look at.’
‎“They brought one, and he said to them:
‎“‘Whose image and inscription is this?’
‎“They said to him: ‘Caesar’s.’
‎“Jesus then said:
‎“‘Pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar,
‎“but God’s things to God.’
‎And they were amazed at him.”
‎“They were amazed at him.”
‎Now, if he had innocently said,
‎‘Yes, pay the Romans the tax,’
‎they would have been infuriated,
not amazed.
‎Jesus diffused the situation by using caution.
‎Well, what are some situations we might face
‎where it would be prudent to exercise caution?
‎Well, one is our conversations.
‎We need to avoid
either praising or criticizing
‎the policy of a political party or leader.
‎Following Jesus’ example
and the comments of Romans chapter 13,
‎we are to be respectful
of the superior authority
‎even if it’s dishonest, corrupt, inept.
‎And one brother
‎(I won’t say which country
he’s from, but he recently told me)
‎said,
“The greatest challenge to my neutrality
‎is not saying something negative
about the current government.”
‎I think we understand.
‎Well, this is also true
when speaking to refugees.
‎Many countries have thousands
of refugees pouring into their land
‎because of opposition
‎from some regime or ethnic attacks.
‎And these ones likely are seething in pain,
‎and they want to talk
about—besmirch—the regime
‎that has pushed them out of the country.
‎So how can we
share the good news ‘like a dove’
‎and yet be “cautious as serpents”?
‎Well, we need to be patient ‘like a dove.’
‎Listen to the refugee,
and they will likely tell some of their horrors.
‎But now we need to be ‘cautious as a serpent’
‎by avoiding getting involved in a discussion
‎of the political elements involved.
‎Instead,
follow the directions of the branch office,
‎and share the good news in such a way
‎so as not to put yourself or others at risk.
‎And when talking to refugees,
‎it’s good to exercise caution
‎when it comes to our clothing,
‎jewelry, and our grooming
‎so that we’re not offensive to their culture.
‎For example, in Myanmar,
‎if a woman’s clothing reveals,
or exposes, her shoulder,
‎that’s viewed as quite offensive.
‎So when we’re talking to refugees,
‎we need to be mindful of customs like that.
‎Well, how about the media?
‎Is there a need to be “cautious as serpents”?
‎Well, you know, in some lands
‎they have State-controlled news reports
‎that are blatantly slanted,
‎and sometimes
Jehovah’s Witnesses are slandered
‎or ridiculous charges
are trumped up against them.
‎A “dove” could be ensnared by these reports
‎and start to tremble.
‎But because of this counsel from Jesus
‎to also be “cautious as serpents,”
‎we’re not easily duped.
‎And how about even in a “free” country?
‎What about the news media
in a “free” country?
‎Christians need to be careful
‎not to adopt the bias
of a particular news commentator.
‎Instead of getting involved
‎in the political leanings
of that news broadcast,
‎we should remember
the words of Paul at 2 Timothy 1:13.
‎At 2 Timothy 1:13, he said:
‎“Keep holding
to the standard of wholesome words . . .
‎“with the faith and love
‎that result from union with Christ Jesus.”
‎So in harmony with our text today,
‎if we’re in “union with Christ Jesus,”
‎then we need to prove ourselves
‎“cautious as serpents” but “innocent as doves.”